workload-partitioning: add plan for configuration and enablement ownership (#753)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/workload-partitioning/rationalizing-configuration.md

to improve the user experience when configuring the feature.

### Goals

1. Describe the remaining work at a high level for architectural
   review and planning.
2. Document the division of responsibility between workload management
   in components in the OpenShift release payload and PAO.
3. List the other enhancements that need to be written, and their
   scopes.

### Non-Goals

1. Resolve all of the details for each of the next steps. We're not
   going to talk a lot about names or implementation details here.

## Proposal

### API

The initial implementation is limited to single-node deployments. To
support multi-node clusters, we need to solve a couple of concurrency
problems. The first is providing a way for the admission hook
responsible for mutating pod definitions to reliably know when the
feature should be enabled. The admission hook cannot store state on
its own, so we need a new API to indicate when the feature is
enabled.

We eventually want to extend the partitioning feature to support
non-management workloads to include workload types defined by cluster
admins. For now, however, we want to keep the interface as simple as

> possible.  Therefore, the new API will be read-only, and only used so

Reviewer: A read-only API is very hard to build since it reflects status from somewhere.  I suggest a normal, CRD based API with a limited set of writers.

Author: Maybe it's a terminology thing, but what we meant here is to have a CRD with only status fields that normal users wouldn't write to.

What other form of read-only APIs are there and how can we better clarify this?

that the admission hook (and other consumers) can tell when workload
partitioning is active.

> The new API will need a controller to manage it. We propose to add a

Reviewer: I'm not really clear on why this API isn't an API where the user expresses his desire and the node changes flow from this desire.

Author: We expect to extend the PerformanceProfile CRD to be used to turn this on. We don't want the admission hook in the core to depend on that CRD, since it is part of the performance-addon-operator and may not be installed in all clusters.

> controller to the existing cluster-config-operator, to avoid adding

Author: Is cluster-config-operator what we said?

the overhead of another image, pod, etc. to the cluster.

We propose that the API be owned by core OpenShift, and defined in the
`openshift/api` repository. A separate enhancement will be written to
describe the API and controller in more detail.

### Owner for Enablement

Workload management needs two node configuration steps which overlap
with work PAO is doing today:

* Set reserved CPUs in kubelet config and enable the CPU manager
  static policy
* Set systemd affinity to match the reserved CPU set

PAO already has logic for managing CPU pools and configuring kubelet
and CRI-O. Since it already does a lot of what is needed to enable
workload partitioning, we propose to extend it to handle the
additional configuration currently being done manually by users,
including the machine config with settings for kubelet and CRI-O.

The effect of this decision is that the easiest way to use the
workload partitioning feature will be through the
performance-addon-operator. This means that the implementation of the
feature is split across a few components, and not all of them are
delivered in all clusters, but it avoids duplicating a lot of the work
already done in the PAO.

> Workload partitioning is currently enabled as part of installing a

Reviewer: so is the flow here
1. user expresses desire for management CPU pool
2. PAO configures the kubeletconfig and systemd somehow
3. PAO watches the state of kubelet config and systemd and updates an API to indicate to the admission plugin: "this is now enabled"

Author: Not quite.

We thought step 3 should not rely on PAO, because the admission plugin always needs to be able to answer the question about whether partitioning is enabled for a particular type. We also don't want to tie that enablement to the implementation details within kubelet or CRI-O. Instead, either the cluster-config-operator or machine-config-operator will have a new controller that looks at the nodes in the cluster to track when they advertise the partition-specific opaque resources (caused by the kubelet config being updated) and manage a status API (to be designed in another enhancement).

Reviewer: > We thought step 3 should not rely on PAO, because the admission plugin always needs to be able to answer the question about whether partitioning is enabled for a particular type.

Above you indicated that the "PerformanceProfile CRD" is used to tell the PAO to configure this.  If the flow requires the PAO to enable, then requiring the PAO to set your status indicator CRD seems reasonable.  The admission plugin could still be active all the time, but at least the user desire and the state of the cluster would be managed by a single component.

Author: So, the status API would be defined in the `openshift/api` repo and available to both the admission plugin and PAO. To keep the admission hook from having a dependency on something defined in PAO, that API needs to not be the PerformanceProfile itself. The CRD for the status API would always be installed, but there may not always be an instance. Something in PAO would create the instance and keep it up to date.

Does that make sense as an approach?

Reviewer 2: Creating another object is easy enough, so yes, PAO can do this. The only question is whether it should be always enabled or whether we should create the instance based on something (master+worker case vs. SNO vs. RWN vs. three nodes total etc..).

Reviewer: > The CRD for the status API would always be installed, but there may not always be an instance. Something in PAO would create the instance and keep it up to date.
> 
> Does that make sense as an approach?

That could work.  So could attaching a status field to an existing resource (is this related to Infrastructure?) that is empty until the PAO sets the value.

Author: We have updated the text to always use the PAO to configure partitioning.

---
title: rationalizing-configuration
authors:
  - "@dhellmann"
  - "@mrunalp"
  - "@browsell"
  - "@MarSik"
  - "@fromanirh"
reviewers:
  - "@deads2k"
  - "@sttts"
  - maintainers of PAO
approvers:
  - "@markmc"
  - "@derekwaynecarr"
creation-date: 2021-04-26
status: implementable
see-also:
  - "/enhancements/management-workload-partitioning.md"
---

# Rationalizing Configuration of Workload Partitioning

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [x] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Operational readiness criteria is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

The initial iteration of workload partitioning focused on a short path
to a minimum viable implementation. This enhancement describes the
loose ends for preparing the feature for GA at a high level, and
explains the set of other design documents that need to be written
separately during the next iteration.

> ## Motivation

Reviewer 3: One other motivation is to allow this capability to be leveraged on non-single node configurations

Author: Great point, I've updated the motivation and goal list to include that.

2. Kubelet starts and sees the config file enabling partitioning. It
   advertises the workload resource type on the Node and mutates
   static pods with partitioning annotations.
3. CRI-O sees pods with workload annotations and uses the resource
   request to set cpushares and cpuset.

#### Day 2: Add a New MachineConfigPool

Adding a new MachineConfigPool is safe only if the MachineConfigPool
has a PerformanceProfile associated and the PAO is installed.

1. PAO reads PerformanceProfile to generate new MachineConfig for the
   pool with CRI-O and `kubelet` settings.
2. MachineConfigs are applied to appropriate nodes, rebooting them in
   the process.
3. Kubelet starts and sees the config file enabling partitioning. It
   advertises the workload resource type on the Node and mutates
   static pods with partitioning annotations.
4. CRI-O sees pods with workload annotations and uses the resource
   request to set cpushares and cpuset.

If the MachineConfigPool does not match a PerformanceProfile, there
will be no cpuset information and the PAO will generate MachineConfigs
with partitioning enabled but not tied to a cpuset. This is somewhat

> safe, but may lead to unexpected behavior.

Reviewer 3: The mutated pods would float across the full cpuset as they would without the feature enabled, however the cpu shares would not get deducted from alloctable cpus potentially leading to over commit scenarios.

Author: Thanks, I've included this info in this section.

   described above. The manifests for CRI-O do not include cpuset
   configuration, because there are no PerformanceProfiles.
3. User runs the installer to `create cluster`.
4. Installer bootstraps the cluster.
5. Bootstrapping runs the machine-config-operator (MCO) `render`
   command, which generates MachineConfig manifests with low
   precedence.
6. Bootstrapping uploads both sets of MachineConfig manifests, one
   after the other.
7. The machine-config-operator (MCO) applies MachineConfigs to nodes
   in the cluster.
8. Bootstrapping finishes and the cluster is launched.
9. If the MCO does not apply KubeletConfig in step 7, it must do it
   here.
11. The cluster has partial partitioning enabled for `management`
    workloads. Pods for management workloads are mutated, but not
    actually partitioned.
12. Kubelet starts and sees the config file enabling partitioning. It
    advertises the workload resource type on the Node and mutates
    static pods with partitioning annotations.
13. Admission plugin uses the workload types on the workloads CR to
    decide when to mutate pods.
14. CRI-O sees pods with workload annotations and uses the resource

>     request to set cpushares but not cpuset.

Reviewer 2: Would the same "pods floating and resources not accounted for" like in new MCP case happen here if steps 15..17 do not happen soon?

Author: Yes, that's right. I can update the text to make that clear.

The reboot in step 18 fixes that by forcing all pods on the node to be rescheduled.

(PAO) during day 2. For OCP 4.8, the onus is on the user to ensure
these align, there is no interlock.  The current implementation is
prone to user error because it has two entities configuring and
managing the same data.

The 4.8 implementation is also limited to single-node deployments. We
anticipate users of highly-available clusters also wanting to minimize
the overhead of the management components to take full advantage of
compute capacity for their own workloads.

This design document describes phase 2 of the implementation plan for
workload partitioning to improve the user experience when configuring
the feature and to extend support to multi-node clusters.

### Goals

1. Describe, at a high level, the remaining work to improve the user
   experience and expand support to multi-node deployments for
   architectural review and planning.
2. Document the division of responsibility between workload management
   in components in the OpenShift release payload and PAO.
3. List the other enhancements that need to be written, and their
   scopes.
4. Minimize the complexity of installing a "normal" cluster while
   still supporting this very special case.

> ### Non-Goals

Author: Done

1. Resolve all of the details for each of the next steps. We're not
   going to talk a lot about names, API fields, or implementation
   details here.
2. Describe an API for (re)configuring workload partitioning in a
   running cluster. We are going to continue to require the user to
   enable partitioning as part of deploying the cluster for another
   implementation phase.

## Proposal

### API

The initial implementation is limited to single-node deployments. To
support multi-node clusters, we need to solve a couple of concurrency
problems. The first is providing a way for the admission hook
responsible for mutating pod definitions to reliably know when the
feature should be enabled. The admission hook cannot store state on
its own, so we need a new API to indicate when the feature is
enabled.

> We eventually want to extend the partitioning feature to support

Reviewer: > @deads2k had objections to status only fields in past when we handled aws resource tags.
> 
> [openshift/api#905](https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/905)

Yes.  Status-only fields need to be able to describe

1. how they will eventually allow human change if it is needed
2. how they react to a cluster-admin setting the field to a different value

I think this API can probably describe it, but it's important to consider it here.  For instance, I think the performance add-on operator could probably re-stomp status if it were changed (needs confirmation).  To allow a human to change it, the  performance add-on operator would need to learn that it could be externally controlled.

Clusters without the PAO won't be able to express "turn it on" without a spec field.  Would a spec field update be prevented under some conditions?

> We eventually want to extend the partitioning feature to support

Reviewer 2: PAO cannot own this object or guarantee any reconcile loop. It is an optional operator installed by OLM.

PAO will merely know how to prepare it using render mode just like it does for MC, KubeletConfig and others to make it easy for admins. But any admin can do the same manually even without PAO.

> We eventually want to extend the partitioning feature to support

Author: We talked about this offline and agreed that we will have spec & status fields but that we will block changes using an admission plugin. See 160aa5d53d648f4d043c475a44a94a17db3d1ae8

non-management workloads to include workload types defined by cluster
admins. For now, however, we want to keep the interface as simple as
possible.  Therefore, the new API will only have status fields and
will only be used so that the admission hook (and other consumers) can
tell when workload partitioning is active.

> To manage the risk associated with rolling out a complicated feature

Reviewer 2: The current design does not expect any reconcile loop to exist, so what you describe is probably what will happen indeed.

extra reboots required to enable it in a running cluster (an important
consideration in environments with short, fixed maintenance
windows). To continue to support enabling the feature during
deployment, and to simplify the configuration, we propose to extend
the PAO with a `render` command, similar to the one in other
operators, to have it generate manifests for the OpenShift installer
to consume. This avoids any need to change the OpenShift installer to
support this uncommon use case.

The `render` command will have an option to enable the management
partition. When the option is given, the `render` command will create
a manifest for the new enablement API with status data that includes
the `management` workload type to enable partitioning (the details of
that API will be defined in a separate design document). In the
future, the PAO might enable partitioning for all of the types
mentioned in the input PerformanceProfiles, or based on some other
input.

For each PerformanceProfile, the PAO will render MachineConfig
manifests with higher precedence than the default ones created by the
installer during bootstrapping. These manifests will include all of

> the details for configuring `kubelet`, CRI-O, and `tuned` to know

Reviewer 2: Correct, PAO uses KubeletConfiguration for setting up system cpu reserved, cpu and topology manager policies. Everything else is done by files and systemd services injected via MC Ignite.

> the details for configuring `kubelet`, CRI-O, and `tuned` to know

Reviewer 4: Ok, I just want to make sure that we are not overwriting ourselves. If multiple different machineconfigs refer to the same file, we may end up in an undesirable state

> the details for configuring `kubelet`, CRI-O, and `tuned` to know

Author: I've tried to clarify that most of the manifests are the same as what PAO already generates.

about and partition workloads, including the cpusets for each workload
type.

The PAO `render` command also generates a manifest with the CRD for
PerformanceProfile so bootstrapping does not block when trying to
install the PerformanceProfile manifests.

> ### Future Work

Reviewer 5: any special instructions on how to address or pull out the pao binary for eventually invoke the render command?

Author: We do want to spend some time thinking about the UX there. Maybe that should happen in the PAO enhancement (item 2 below).

Reviewer 2: Yep, this is something I touched upon in the PAO render mode enhancement. The model we want to use is to let the user execute it via `podman pullspec/pao:version <render-command-stuff>` from his laptop.

1. Write an enhancement to describe the API the admission hook will
   use to determine when workload partitioning is enabled.
2. Write an enhancement to describe the changes in
   performance-addon-operator to manage the kubelet and CRI-O
   configuration when workload partitioning is enabled, including the
   `render` command. See https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNF-2164 to
   track that work.

### User Stories

#### Enabling and Configuring at the Same Time

In this workflow, the user provides all of the information needed to
fully partition the workloads from the very beginning.

1. User runs the installer to `create manifests` to get standard
   manifests without any partitioning.
2. The user creates PerformanceProfile manifests for each known

>    MachineConfigPool and adds them to the installer inputs.

Reviewer 4: non-worker non-master MCPs cannot be booted into today (there are a lot of open discussions on this). So you'd effectively be booting first into worker then update into custom.

>    MachineConfigPool and adds them to the installer inputs.

Author: If that's already a limitation, I think we can ignore it for now and address it independently of the workload-partitioning feature in the future.

3. The user runs the PAO `render` command to read the
   PerformanceProfile manifests and create additional manifests, as
   described above.
4. User runs the installer to `create cluster`.
5. Installer bootstraps the cluster.

> 6. Bootstrapping runs the machine-config-operator (MCO) `render`

Reviewer 4: I'm a bit confused as to what points 6-8 are pointing at. It sounds to me that you are trying to describe the mechanism for which the MCO bootstraps and ensures that the PAO-generated special kubelet/crio configs are ordered. But these steps don't really explicitly highlight that, and also is a bit vague as to the details.

Reviewer 4: Sure :) sorry, I can try to highlight the ordering:

The bootstrap node runs bootstrap versions of 1 MCController 1 MCServer. The MCC is responsible for generating master configs, and the MCS is responsible for serving that master config. 

At the time the MCC runs, it should see all manifests applied to the cluster (as templates directly), at least if it directly targets the MCO namespace. However there is no guarantee that other objects are ready and updated, which is where race conditions have occured in the past: if any of them get modified after bootstrap MCC has finished but the in-cluster MCC has not yet started. (also tangentially related to the kubeletconfig not being day-1 since there is nothing processing those objects into Machineconfigs yet).

The master nodes come up and form the real cluster, at which point it runs the "in-cluster" MCC and MCS, which generates the config to serve worker nodes.

So in that flow, any extra manifests, provided the are created before bootstrap are run, are no different than any template-shipped MCs that are applied day1. The only thing that matters then is the alphanumeric naming schema of the MC object, which determines their order of merging into the "rendered config". That is to say, if 2 MCs named `99-xx` and `11-xx` write to the same file, only the contents of `99-xx` will be there, and whatever is in `11-xx` is "silently dropped"

Author: @mrunalp @browsell @MarSik It sounds like we may have to deal with a race condition here.

Author: After speaking with @yuqi-zhang offline, I added a note in the risk section to cover this. See fe703ad7924eccf5eb27fcc50bc2ba44235a7727

   command, which generates MachineConfig manifests with low
   precedence.
7. Bootstrapping uploads both sets of MachineConfig manifests, one
   after the other.
8. The machine-config-operator (MCO) applies MachineConfigs to nodes
   in the cluster.
9. Bootstrapping finishes and the cluster is launched.

> 10. If the MCO does not apply KubeletConfig in step 8, it must do it

Reviewer 4: I'm a bit confused. Up until now you do not explicitly mention kubeletconfigs, but instead use machineconfigs. Is this what the PAO is generating?

If so this is today not doable as a day 1 operation, and will effectively be day2 (extra reboots across all nodes) but will be automatic

Reviewer 4: We did have some chatter about allowing day-1 kubeletconfig generation (adding the kubeletconfigcontroller into the bootstrap MCC), so that's a potential option if really needed

Author: > We did have some chatter about allowing day-1 kubeletconfig generation (adding the kubeletconfigcontroller into the bootstrap MCC), so that's a potential option if really needed

Yes, we're trying to simultaneously configure things properly from the very beginning of the cluster's life (to avoid some very ugly edge cases) and avoid a ton of reboots (to minimize deploy time, since metal reboots veeeery slowly).

    request to set cpushares and cpuset.
15. On day 2 PAO, is installed and takes ownership of the
    PerformanceProfile CRs.

#### Enabling During Installation, Configuring Later

In this workflow, the user provides enough information to *enable*
workload partitioning but not enough to actually *configure* all nodes
to partition the workloads into specific CPUs.

1. User runs the installer to `create manifests` to get standard
   manifests without any partitioning.
2. The user runs the PAO `render` command without any
   PerformanceProfile manifests to create the additional manifests, as
   described above. The manifests for CRI-O do not include cpuset
   configuration, because there are no PerformanceProfiles.
3. User runs the installer to `create cluster`.
4. Installer bootstraps the cluster.
5. Bootstrapping runs the machine-config-operator (MCO) `render`
   command, which generates MachineConfig manifests with low
   precedence.
6. Bootstrapping uploads both sets of MachineConfig manifests, one
   after the other.
7. The machine-config-operator (MCO) applies MachineConfigs to nodes
   in the cluster.
8. Bootstrapping finishes and the cluster is launched.

> 9. If the MCO does not apply KubeletConfig in step 7, it must do it

Reviewer 6: a little confused on this step 9, the cluster is up and done, but the MCO will just roll some changes out? what is the trigger on this? does the user have to do something?

Author: It wasn't clear to us whether the MCO render command consumed KubeletConfig resources, so that they would be included in the roll-out of the initial configuration to the host, or if that would have to happen once the cluster was up. From what @yuqi-zhang says above, it sounds like it's the latter, today. So the trigger is the MCO waking up and noticing that some of the extra manifests created by the PAO and added to the cluster during installation were KubeletConfig and that those haven't been applied.

The user can change the settings after the cluster is up using the PAO's PerformanceProfile API.

Author: I've added some wording to clarify the timing here.

4. The cluster has complete partitioning configuration for management
   workloads and the management workloads are partitioned due to the
   nodes rebooting.
5. Kubelet starts and sees the config file enabling partitioning. It
   advertises the workload resource type on the Node and mutates
   static pods with partitioning annotations.
6. Admission plugin uses the workload types on the workloads CR to
   decide when to mutate pods.
7. CRI-O sees pods with workload annotations and uses the resource
   request to set cpushares and cpuset.

#### Day 2: Add a New Node to an Existing MachineConfigPool

In a cluster with partitioning enabled and fully configured, adding a
new node to an existing MachineConfigPool is safe because the
MachineConfig will set up kubelet and CRI-O on the host correctly.

1. The MCO applies the MachineConfigs to the node.
2. Kubelet starts and sees the config file enabling partitioning. It
   advertises the workload resource type on the Node and mutates
   static pods with partitioning annotations.
3. CRI-O sees pods with workload annotations and uses the resource
   request to set cpushares and cpuset.

#### Day 2: Add a New MachineConfigPool

> Adding a new MachineConfigPool is safe only if the MachineConfigPool

Reviewer 4: all custom MCPs inherit from worker, so they must have worker-MCP based configs.

This is somewhat of an issue in the kubeletconfig use case today. The kubeletconfig doesn't really order based on pool priority but implied MCO naming-schema priority, which means if a worker pool and a custom pool both have custom kubeletconfigs, the one that actually gets laid down is alphabetically ordered, meaning that `custom, worker` will result in worker configs, and `worker,zz-custom` will result in zz-custom configs.

The suggestion today I have is not to have base worker kubeletconfigs if you have custom pools that need different ones. All nodes that require separate kubeletconfigs must be in a custom pool (empty worker pool). I think we should reconsider this section

Author: That's not any different from what we have today, right? I don't know what the best practices for using PerformanceProfiles is, but I don't expect that to change dramatically as a result of this work.

@browsell or @MarSik may have more insight into how they're being used today.

Reviewer 4: No, that is the behaviour today. I just want to make sure we are not overwriting our own configs. Custom pools need to be handled very carefully

Reviewer 2: Yeah, this is not going to change.

Btw the fact that KubeletConfigs cannot be layered is already causing us some headaches. It is a different feature altogether, but we need to set cpu manager stuff and customers want to enable unsafe syscalls. And there just is no way to do that and keep ownership of just half of the config.

MachineConfigs for the new MachineConfigPool. See the [Risks
section](#risks-and-mitigations) for details.

### Risks and Mitigations

There is some risk of shipping a feature with part of the
implementation in the OpenShift release payload but the enabling tool
delivered separately. PAO is considered to be a "core" OpenShift
component, even though it is delivered separately. There is not a
separate SKU for it, for example. The PAO team has been working
closely with the node team on the implementation of this feature, so
we do not anticipate any issues delivering the finished work in this
way.

If a MachineConfigPool exists without a matching PerformanceProfile,
there will be no cpuset information and the PAO will generate
MachineConfigs with partitioning enabled but not tied to a cpuset.
This is somewhat safe, but may lead to unexpected behavior. The
mutated pods would float across the full cpuset in the same way as if
partitioning was not enabled and the cpushares would not be deducted
from available CPUs, potentially leading to over commit scenarios.

If the PAO is not installed into a cluster with workload partitioning

> enabled and configured, adding a new MachineConfigPool can be unsafe.

Reviewer 4: Like above, I think we should carefully consider custom pool use cases and whether we want to support them at all.

Author: I don't think we're going to be able to avoid supporting custom pools.

The nodes in the pool will not enable partitioning at all. This may
not be safe, since kubelet will not advertise the workload resource
type but the admission plugin will mutate pods to require it. The
scheduler may refuse to place management workloads on the nodes in the
pool.

## Design Details

### Open Questions

1. What runs the PAO `render` command in the assisted installer
   workflow?
2. How hard do we need to work to ensure that the PAO version matches
   the release payload version for the cluster being deployed?
   What/who is responsible for that?

> 3. We need to ensure MCO render handles the KubeletConfig CR generated

Reviewer 6: I guess some of this wasnt' clear to me but mostly what we're talking about is PAO->kubelet/containerruntimes CRDs? or is PAO looking to create its own that it's expecting the MCO to render into a renderedconfig?

Author: The PAO does define its own PerformanceProfile CRD, and it renders them down to KubeletConfig and MachineConfig resources already. Some of the work for this release will be to extend that to include the new settings, but we don't expect the MCO to understand any new APIs.

https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/workload-partitioning/management-workload-partitioning.md#high-level-end-to-end-workflow has a bit more detail about what's being done manually today that we're trying to automate here.

workload partitioning, we propose to extend it to handle the
additional configuration currently being done manually by users,
including the machine config with settings for kubelet and CRI-O.

The effect of this decision is that the easiest way to use the
workload partitioning feature will be through the
performance-addon-operator. This means that the implementation of the
feature is split across a few components, which avoids duplicating a
lot of the work already done in the PAO.

Workload partitioning is currently enabled as part of installing a
cluster, and that will not change as part of the implementation of
this design. Enabling partitioning early in this way provides
predictable behavior from the beginning of the life-cycle, and avoids
extra reboots required to enable it in a running cluster (an important
consideration in environments with short, fixed maintenance
windows). To continue to support enabling the feature during
deployment, and to simplify the configuration, we propose to extend
the PAO with a `render` command, similar to the one in other
operators, to have it generate manifests for the OpenShift installer

> to consume. This avoids any need to change the OpenShift installer to

Reviewer 7: I don't understand how the installer consumes these. Are you sure you write what you mean?

Author: "consume" may be a bad choice of words, here. I think all we mean is that they are passed as extra manifests, and the installer does what it would normally do with any extra manifests.

```suggestion
as extra manifests. This avoids any need to change the OpenShift installer to
```

Author: I added a note to cover that.

support this uncommon use case.

The `render` command will have an option to enable the management
partition. When the option is given, the `render` command will create
a manifest for the new enablement API with status data that includes
the `management` workload type to enable partitioning (the details of
that API will be defined in a separate design document). In the
future, the PAO might enable partitioning for all of the types
mentioned in the input PerformanceProfiles, or based on some other
input.

For each PerformanceProfile, the PAO will render MachineConfig
manifests with higher precedence than the default ones created by the
installer during bootstrapping. These manifests will include all of
the details for configuring `kubelet`, CRI-O, and `tuned` to know
about and partition workloads, including the cpusets for each workload
type.

> The PAO `render` command also generates a manifest with the CRD for

Reviewer 3: It will need to be extended to generate the CRD manifest as well.

> The PAO `render` command also generates a manifest with the CRD for

Author: Right, this is a forward-looking statement about what the render command will do when the design is implemented.

> The PAO `render` command also generates a manifest with the CRD for

Reviewer 2: Yep, we are doing it backwards here. We have the initial implementation before the design :) But we need this part indeed, so the implementation will change.

PerformanceProfile so bootstrapping does not block when trying to
install the PerformanceProfile manifests.

### Future Work

1. Write an enhancement to describe the API the admission hook will
   use to determine when workload partitioning is enabled.
2. Write an enhancement to describe the changes in
   performance-addon-operator to manage the kubelet and CRI-O
   configuration when workload partitioning is enabled, including the
   `render` command. See https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNF-2164 to
   track that work.

### User Stories

#### Enabling and Configuring at the Same Time

In this workflow, the user provides all of the information needed to
fully partition the workloads from the very beginning.

1. User runs the installer to `create manifests` to get standard
   manifests without any partitioning.

> 2. The user creates PerformanceProfile manifests for each known

Reviewer 3: Wouldn't we need those CR's to be applied though ?

> 2. The user creates PerformanceProfile manifests for each known

Author: It does seem like we would normally want the PerformanceProfiles added to the cluster so that when the PAO is installed it has the same inputs available as the render command. What would be the benefit of not installing them?

I think we discussed it, but I don't remember the answer. Does the PAO need any of the other manifests the installer will create in step 1? If not, should we move step 3 before step 1 to make that clear?

> 2. The user creates PerformanceProfile manifests for each known

Reviewer 2: YEs, I think even the PerformanceProfile needs passed to the installer. For multiple reasons: all the generated objects will have an ownership reference pointing to it, and the user will not want to post it again post install (even though it would probably work too).

About the order, PAO does not need anything from the installer (yet), it is not reading anything. That might change as we might be checking the MCPs and Nodes to generate the right label selectors.

> 2. The user creates PerformanceProfile manifests for each known

Reviewer 2: My only concern is the PerformanceProfile CRD. That one is normally owned by OLM...

> 2. The user creates PerformanceProfile manifests for each known

Author: If `render` includes the CRD, then either the OLM version would overwrite it or OLM could simply update the ownership like some other operators do. We should verify that that works, though, in case we need to teach OLM that some things it installs might already exist.

workload partitioning but not enough to actually *configure* all nodes
to partition the workloads into specific CPUs.

1. User runs the installer to `create manifests` to get standard
   manifests without any partitioning.
2. The user runs the PAO `render` command without any
   PerformanceProfile manifests to create the additional manifests, as
   described above. The manifests for CRI-O do not include cpuset
   configuration, because there are no PerformanceProfiles.
3. User runs the installer to `create cluster`.
4. Installer bootstraps the cluster.
5. Bootstrapping runs the machine-config-operator (MCO) `render`
   command, which generates MachineConfig manifests with low
   precedence.
6. Bootstrapping uploads both sets of MachineConfig manifests, one
   after the other.
7. The machine-config-operator (MCO) applies MachineConfigs to nodes
   in the cluster.
8. Bootstrapping finishes and the cluster is launched.
9. If the MCO does not apply KubeletConfig in step 7, it must do it
   here after the MCO is running in the cluster and can reconcile
   normally.
11. The cluster has partial partitioning enabled for `management`

>     workloads. Pods for management workloads are mutated, but not

Reviewer: is this the bit via the kube-apiserver admission or kubelet admission?

Author: Both kubelet and the admission hook will do the mutation, but CRI-O won't have the settings to place the containers on a specific cpuset.
